EmaC=s is a small (~1.5KB) alternative to the built-in Commodore text editor.

The pair of well-placed Control keys (abbreviated "C-" below) on Commodore's
underappreciated Plus/4 always cried out to me for an editor application that
could make use of them, especially since dual C-keys didn't make it onto the
IBM model "M" keyboards until later in 1984, and even then they were placed
too low for comfortable frequent use in an editor such as Emacs.

Here is a machine-language set of Emacs-style key bindings that I use myself
in preference to the built-in editor.  It can repeat most keyboard actions a
set number of times, cut and yank back entire 40-character lines or portions
thereof, and indicates the X,Y cursor position as well as insertion mode
unambiguously at all times (verbally and with distinct cursor colors).

Upon invocation, the RETURN key reverts to a carriage return (same as SHIFT+
RETURN) in order to edit a screen of data quickly.  Areas of the screen may
be split, to preserve regions being copied for instance and prevent them from
being scrolled.  Upon exit, the indicator bar disappears and the split areas
are re-merged at which point the Commodore OS bindings are reactivated and
the RETURN key may be used to enter lines into BASIC, or the machine language
MONITOR.

A Makefile is provided to build from the included source with the xa65 cross-
assembler.  The sole option thus far is whether the INSerT key should behave
as in the Commodore (each press of SHIFT+DELETE inserts a space character,
most useful in OVeRwrite mode) or as in Emacs (mode toggle between OVeRwrite
and INSerT modes).  The Makefile is set for Emacs-style since the equivalent
ESC-X O is a bit long, but this can be easily reverted to Commodore mode.

The executable is called emac=s.prg, and may either be copied to a Commodore-
formatted diskette (or .D64 diskette image in an emulator) or stored on a
cassette tape as with this same name.  The command to load it into memory is:

     LOAD"EMAC=S",8,1				(from disk)
     LOAD"EMAC=S",1,1				(from cassette tape)

If Autostarted in VICE it will be run automatically; otherwise it is necessary
to type:

   RUN

The executable code advances the bottom-of-BASIC TXTTAB pointer to roughly
address $1600, 1.5KB above the screen memory.  The code to do this update
actually resides below the BASIC SYS call stub, in the last 24 bytes of the
screen starting at $0fe8 which are not normally used.  (Thus the address in
the first two bytes of the .PRG file are $e8 and $0f, and so it is important
to include the ,1 flag at the end so that the code doesn't get relocated.)
Thus total system memory remaining for BASIC is roughly 58KB on a Plus/4 and
10.5KB on a C16 (0.5KB if high-resolution GRAPHICs are active).

After printing a summary of usage and GPL licence, the considerable ~0.5KB RAM
required for storing that message has already been freed.  The "READY." prompt
(if invoked from BASIC rather than the MONITOR) is displayed and the top line
of the screen displays instructions for resuming the EmaC=s editor.  The
usable screen is thus 24 lines rather than 25, with the tradeoff that entering
EmaC=s mode can always be accomplished by pressing the home key twice:

       HOME HOME RETURN

Leaving EmaC=s and returning to BASIC or MONITOR mode (where typed commands/
lines can actually be interpreted by the OS) is accomplished by pressing C-z
or the Escape key twice:

       ESC ESC

If Emacs is exited completely with C-x C-c, the full memory is returned to the
system.  If you type this accidentally, it may be possible to re-RUN the BASIC
stub to re-launch the Editor.

It uses the windowing capabilities of BASIC 3.5 machines, but presents Emacs'
improved interface for splitting the screen as compared with cursoring over to
a new location and pressing ESC-T or ESC-B.  Furthermore it is deemed that
windows narrower than 40 characters are not useful, so the screen is only ever
split into at most two horizontal regions between 1 and 24 rows high, totaling
24 rows plus an indicator bar that displays cursor position and insert versus
overwrite mode as well as any prefix keys (ESC-, C-X or C-number) that are
active.  The ESC-T and ESC-B sequences still work, but they constrict only the
vertical extent of the active window (not narrowing it in width) and give the
space over to the inactive window.

In fact most of the Commodore ESC-prefixed bindings still work, so that a new
line may be opened with either C-o or ESC-I, the cursor moved to the leftmost
column with either C-a or ESC-J, etc.  Note however that since native mode has
no support for cut/copy/paste, C-k and ESC-q will both obliterate the rest of
a line but only the former will stash the contents away ina kill buffer.

Because the equal sign '=' meant to represent the Commodore logo is not an
allowed character in a project name, the github repo is named "EmaCsixteen", 
as in "Emacs C-16".  Full C-code exists in the comments in the right margin
of the 6502 assembler source in main.asm to make it easier for you to read
and modify.  Enjoy!

Daud A. Zoss
November 9, 2015
